[Music]
I'm gonna talk today about energy and
climate and that might seem a bit
surprising because my full-time work at
the foundation is mostly about vaccines
and seeds about the things that we need
to invent and deliver to help the
poorest 2 billion live better lives but
energy and climate are extremely
important to these people in fact more
important than to anyone else on the
planet the climate getting worse means
that many years their crops won't grow
there'll be too much rain not enough
rain things will change in ways that
their fragile environment simply can't
support and that leads to starvation
that leads to uncertainty it leads to
unrest so the climate changes will be
terrible for them also the price of
energy is very important to them in fact
if you could pick just one thing to
lower the price of to reduce poverty by
far you would pick energy now the price
of energy has come down over time really
advanced civilization is based on it
advances in in energy the coal
revolution fueled the Industrial
Revolution and even in the 1900s we've
seen a very rapid decline in the price
of electricity and that's why we have
refrigerators air conditioning we can
make modern materials and do so many
things and so we're in a wonderful
situation with electricity in the rich
world but as we make it cheaper and
let's say let's go for making it twice
as cheap we need to mean a new
constraint and that constraint has to do
with co2 co2 is warming the planet and
the equation on co2 is actually a very
straightforward one if you sum up the
co2 that gets emitted that leads to a
temperature increase and that
temperature increase leads to some very
negative effect
the effects on the weather perhaps worse
the indirect effects in that the natural
ecosystems can't adjust to these rapid
changes and so you get ecosystem
collapses now the exact amount of how
you map from a certain increase in of
co2 to what temperature will be and
where the positive feedbacks are there's
some uncertainty there but not very much
and there's certainly uncertainty about
how bad those effects will be but they
will be extremely bad I asked the top
scientists in this several times do we
really have to get down to near zero
can't we just you know cut it in half or
a quarter and the answer is that until
we get near to zero the temperature will
continue to rise and so that's that's a
big challenge it's very different than
saying you know we're a 12-foot high
truck trying to get under a ten-foot
bridge and we can just sort of squeeze
under this is something that has to get
to zero now we put out a lot of carbon
dioxide every year over twenty six
billion tons for each American it's
about twenty tons for people in poor
countries it's less than one tonne it's
an average about five tons for everyone
on the planet and somehow we have to
make changes that will bring that down
to zero it's been constantly going up
it's only various economic changes that
have even flattened it at all so we have
to go from rapidly rising to falling and
falling all the way to zero this
equation has four factors a little bit
of multiplication so you've got a thing
on the Left co2 that you want to get to
zero and that's going to be based on the
number of people the services each
person's using on average the energy on
average for each service and the co2
being put out a per unit of energy so
let's look at each one of these and see
how we can get this down to zero
probably one of these numbers is going
to have to get pretty near to zero now
that's back from a high school algebra
but let's let's take a look first we've
got population now the world today has
6.8 billion people that's
headed up to about nine billion now if
we do a really great job on new vaccines
health care reproductive health services
we could lower that by perhaps ten or
fifteen percent but there we see an
increase of about 1.3 the second factor
is the services we use this encompasses
everything the food we clothing TV
heating these are very good things
getting rid of poverty means providing
these services to almost everyone on the
planet and it's a great thing for this
number to go up in the rich world
perhaps the top 1 billion we probably
could cut back and use less but every
year this number on average is going to
go up and so overall that will more than
double the services delivered per person
here we have a very basic service do you
have lighting in your house to be able
to read your homework and in fact these
kids don't so they're going out and
reading their schoolwork under the
street lamps now efficiency e the energy
for each service here finally we have
some good news we have something that's
not going up through various inventions
and new ways of doing lighting through
different types of cars different ways
of building buildings there are a lot of
services where you can bring the energy
for that service down quite
substantially some individual services
even bring it down by 90% there are
other services like how we make
fertilizer or how we do air transport
where the rooms for improvement are far
far less and so overall here if we're
optimistic we may get a reduction of a
factor of 3 to even perhaps a factor of
6 but for these first three factors now
we've gone from 26 billion to at best
maybe 13 billion tons and that just
won't cut it so let's look at this
fourth factor there's going to be a key
one and this is the amount of co2 put
out for each unit of energy and so the
question is can you actually get that to
zero if you burn coal
no if you burn natural gas now almost
every way we make electricity today
except for the emerging renewables and
nuclear puts out co2 and so we're going
to have to do at a global scale is
create a new system and so we need
energy miracles now when I use the term
miracle I don't mean something that's
impossible you know they the
microprocessor is a miracle the personal
computers a miracle the internet and its
services are a miracle so the people
here have participated in the creation
of many miracles usually we don't have a
deadline or you have to get the miracle
by a certain date usually you just kind
of stand by and some come along some
don't this is a case where we actually
have to drive at full speed and get a
miracle in a pretty tight timeline now I
thought how could I really capture this
is there some kind of natural
illustration some demonstration that
would grab people's imagination here I
thought back to a year ago when I
brought mosquitos and somehow people
enjoyed that it really got them involved
in the idea of you know other people who
live with mosquitoes so with energy I'll
I could come up with is this I decided
that releasing fireflies would be my
contribution to the environment here
this year so here we have something out
for fireflies I'm told they don't bite
in fact they might even not even leave
that jar
now there's all sorts of gimmicky
solutions like that one but they don't
really add up too much we need solutions
either one or several that have
unbelievable scale and unbelievable
reliability and although there's many
directions or people seeking I really
only see five that can achieve the big
numbers I've left out tied geothermal
fusion biofuels those may make some
contribution and if they can do better
than I expect so much the better but my
key point here is that we're going to
have to work on each of these five and
we can't give up any of them because
they look daunting because they all have
significant challenges let's look first
at the burning fossil fuels either
burning coal or burning natural gas what
you need to do there seems like it might
be simple but it's not and that's to
take all the co2 after you burn it going
out the flue pressurize it create a
liquid put it somewhere and hope it
stays there now we have some pilot
things that do this at the 60 to 80%
level but getting up to that full
percentage that will be very tricky and
a green on where these co2 quantities
should be put will be hard but the
toughest one here is this long-term
issue who's gonna be sure who's going to
guarantee something that is literally
billions of times larger than any type
of waste you think of in in terms of
nuclear or other things this is a lot of
volume so that's a tough one
next would be nuclear it also has three
big problems costs particularly in
highly regulated countries is high the
issue of the safety really feeling good
about nothing can go wrong that even
though you have these human operators
that the fuel doesn't get used for
weapons and then where what do you do
with the waste although it's not very
large there are a lot of concerns about
that people need to feel good about it
so three very tough problems that might
be solvable and so should be worked on
the last three of the
five I've grouped together these are
what people often refer to as the
renewable sources and they actually
although it's great they don't require
fuel they have some disadvantages one is
that the density of energy gather in
these technologies is dramatically less
than a power plant this is energy
farming so you're talking about many
square miles thousands of times more
area than it then you think of as a
normal energy plant also these are
intermittent sources the Sun doesn't
shine all day it doesn't shine every day
and likewise the wind doesn't blow all
the time and so if you depend on these
sources you have to have some way of
getting energy during those time periods
that it's not available so we've got big
cost challenges here we have
transmission challenges for example say
this energy sources outside your country
you not only need the technology but you
have to deal with the risk of the energy
coming from elsewhere and finally this
storage problem and to dimensionalize
this I went through and looked at all
the types of batteries that get made for
cars for computers for phones for
flashlights for everything and compared
that to the amount of electrical energy
the world uses and what I found is that
all the batteries we make now could
store less than 10 minutes of all the
energy and so in fact we need a big
breakthrough here something that's going
to be a factor of a hundred better than
the approaches we have now it's not it's
not impossible but it's not a very easy
thing now this shows up when you try to
get the the intermittent source to be
above say twenty to thirty percent of
what you're using if you're counting on
it for a hundred percent you need a an
incredible miracle battery now how we're
gonna go forward on this what's what's
the right approach is it a ban Hatton
project what's the thing that can get us
there well we need lots of companies
working on this hundreds in each of
these five paths we need at least a
hundred people and a lot of them you
look at and say they're crazy
that's good and I think here in the Ted
group we have many people who are
already pursuing this Bill Gross has
several companies including one called
East solar that has some great solar
thermal technology Vinod Khosla is
investing and dozens of companies that
are doing great things and have
interesting possibilities and I'm trying
to help back that I need the miracle
than I actually are backing a company
that perhaps surprisingly is actually
taking the nuclear approach there are
some innovations in nuclear modular
liquid and innovation really stopped in
this industry quite some time ago so the
idea that there's some good ideas laying
around is not all that surprising the
idea of a tear up our is that instead of
burning the part of uranium the 1% just
the u-235 we decided well let's burn the
99% the u-238 it is kind of a crazy idea
in fact people had talked about it for a
long time but they could never simulate
properly whether it would work or not
and so it's through the advent of modern
supercomputers that now you can simulate
and see that yes with the right
materials approach this looks like it
would work and because you're burning
that 99 percent you have greatly
improved cost profile you actually burn
up the waste and you can actually use as
fuel all the leftover waste from today's
reactors and so instead of worrying
about them you just take that it's a
great thing it breeds this uranium as it
goes along so it's kind of like the
candle you can see it's it's a log
they're often referred to as a traveling
wave reactor in terms of fuel this
really solves the problem I've got a
picture here of a place in Kentucky this
is the leftover the 99% were they taken
out the part they burn now so it's
called depleted uranium that would power
the u.s. for hundreds of years and
simply by filtering seawater in an
inexpensive process you'd have enough
fuel for the entire lifetime of the rest
of the planet so you know it's got lots
lots of challenges they had but
it is an example of the many hundreds
and hundreds of ideas that we need to
move forward so let's think how should
we measure ourselves what should our
report card look like well let's go out
to where we really need to get and and
then look at the intermediate for 2050
you've heard many people talk about this
80% reduction that really is very
important that we get there and that 20%
will be used up by things going on in
poor countries still some agriculture
hopefully we will have cleaned up
forestry cement so to get to that 80%
the developed countries including
countries like China will have had to
switch their electric electricity
generation all together so the other
grade is are we deploying this zero
emission technology we deployed it in
all the developed countries and we're in
the process of getting it out elsewhere
that's super important that's a key
element of making that report card so
backing up from there
let's should the 2020 report card look
like well again it should have the two
elements we should go through these
efficiency measures to start getting
reductions the less we emit the less
that some will be of co2 and therefore
the less the temperature but in some
ways the grade we get they're doing
things that don't get us all the way to
the big reductions is only equally or
maybe even slightly less important than
the other which is the piece of
innovation on these breakthroughs these
breakthroughs we need to move those at
full speed and we can measure that in
terms of companies pilot projects
regulatory things that have been changed
there's a lot of great books they've
been written about this the Al Gore book
our choice and the David Mekhi book
sustainable energy without the hot air
they really go through it and I think
can great a framework that this can be
discussed broadly because we need broad
backing for this there's a lot that has
to come together so this is a wish it's
a very concrete wish that we invent this
technology if you gave me only one
wish for the next 50 years I can pick
who's president I can picked a vaccine
which is something I love or I could
pick that this thing that's half the
cost with no co2 gets invented this is
the wish I would pick this is the one
with the greatest impact if we don't get
this wish the division between the
people who think short term and long
term will be terrible between US and
China between poor countries and rich
and most of all the lives of those two
billion will be far worse so what do we
have to do what am i appealing to you to
step forward and and drive we need to go
for more research funding and when
countries get together at places like
Copenhagen nation just discuss the co2
they should discuss this innovation
agenda and you'd be stunned at the
ridiculously low levels of spending on
these innovative approaches we do need
the market incentives co2 tax cap and
trade something that gets that price
signal out there we need to get the
message out we need to have this
dialogue be a more rational more
understandable dialogue including the
steps that the government takes this is
an important wish but it is one I think
we can achieve thank you
thank you
thank you thank you
so thank you
understand more about about Terra Paulo
right I mean first of all what can you
give a sense of what sort of scale of
investment this is well to do you
actually do this software by the
supercomputer or hire all the great
scientists which we've done that's only
tens of millions and even once we test
our materials out in a Russian reactor
to make sure that our materials work
properly then you'll only be up in
hundreds of millions the toughing is
building the pilot reactor finding the
several billion finding the the
regulator the location that will
actually build the first one of these
why don't you get the first one built if
it works as advertised then it's just
clear as day because the economics the
energy density are so different than
nuclear as we know it and so to
understand it right this involves
building deep into the ground almost
like like a vertical kind of column of
nuclear fuel of this sort of spent
uranium and then and then and then the
process starts at the top and kind of
works down that's right today you're
always refuelling the reactor so you
have lots of people and lots of controls
that can go wrong that thing where
you're opening it up and moving things
in and out that's that's not good so if
you have very very cheap fuel then you
can put 60 years in just think of it as
a log put it down and not have those
same complexities and it just sits there
and burns for the six years and and then
it's done it's a it's a nuclear power
plant that is its own waste disposal
solution yeah well what happens with the
waste you can you can let it sit there
there's a lot less waste under this
approach then you can actually take that
and put it into another one and burn
that and and we start out actually by
taking the waste that exists today
that's sitting in these cooling pools
our dry casting by reactors that's our
fuel to begin with so the thing that's
been a problem from those reactors is
actually what gets fed into ours and
you're reducing the volume of the waste
quite dramatically as you're going
through this process I mean you're
talking to different people around the
world about the possibilities here where
is their most interest in actually doing
something with it
well we haven't picked a particular
place but and there's all these
interesting disclosure rules about
anything that's called nuclear so we've
got a lot of interest the people from
the company have been in Russia India
China I've been back seeing the
Secretary of Energy here talking about
how this fits into the the energy agenda
so I'm optimistic you know the French
and Japanese have done some work this is
a variant on something that has been
done it's an important advance but it's
like a fast reactor and a lot of
countries have built them so anybody
who's done a fast reactor is a candidate
to be where the first one gets built so
in in your mind timescale and likelihood
of actually taking something like this
live what we need for one of these high
scale electric electrical generation
things that's very cheap we have 20
years to invent and then 20 years to
deploy that's sort of the deadline that
the environment environmental models
have have have shown us that we have to
meet and you know terraPower if things
go well which is wishing for a lot could
easily meet that and there are
fortunately now dozens of companies we
need to be hundreds who likewise if
their science goes well if the funding
for their plant pilot plants goes well
that they they can compete for this and
it's best if multiple succeed because
then you can use a mix a mix of these
things we certainly need one to succeed
I mean in terms of big scale possible
game changes this is the biggest that
you're aware about they're an energy
breakthrough is the the most important
thing it would have been even without
the environmental comes Frank but the
environmental concentrate just makes
that so much so much greater in the
nuclear space there are other innovators
you know we don't know their work as
well as we know this one but the modular
people that's a different approach
there's a liquid type reactor which
seems a little hard but maybe they say
about us and so there there are
different ones but the beauty of this is
a molecule uranium has a million times
as much energy
as a molecule of say coal and so if you
can deal with the negatives which was
essentially the radiation the footprint
and cost the potential in terms of
effect on land and various things is in
almost in a class of its own hmm if this
doesn't work then what do we have to
start taking emergency measures to try
and keep the temperature of the earth
stable yeah if you get into that
situation it's like if you're you've
been overeating and you're about to have
a heart attack you know then then then
where do you go you may need heart
surgery or something there is a line of
research on what's called geoengineering
which are various techniques that would
delay the heating to Bias 20 or 30 years
to get our act together now you hope
that's just an insurance policy you hope
you don't need to do that some people
say you shouldn't even work on the
insurance policy because it might make
you lazy that you'll keep eating because
you know heart surgery will be there to
save you I'm not sure that's wise given
the importance of the problem but
there's now that the geoengineering
discussion about should that be in the
back pocket in case things happen faster
or this innovation goes a lot slower
than we expect climate skeptics if you
had a sentence or two to say to them how
might you persuade them that they're
wrong well unfortunately the skeptics
come in different camps I mean the ones
who make scientific arguments are very
few you know are they saying that
there's negative feedback effects that
have to do with clouds that offset
things there are very very few things
that they can even say you know there's
a chance and a million of those things
the main problem you have here it's kind
of like AIDS you make the mistake now
and you pay for it
a lot later and so when you have all
sorts of urgent problems the idea of
taking pain now that has to do with a
game later and a somewhat uncertain
painting in fact the IPCC report you
know that that's not necessarily the
worst case and there are people in the
ritual to look at IPCC and say okay you
know
that that isn't that big a deal the fact
is it's that uncertain part that should
move us towards us but my dream here is
that if you can make it economic and
meet the co2 constraint then the
skeptics say okay I don't care that it
doesn't put out co2 I kind of wish it
did put out co2 but I guess I'll accept
it because it's cheaper right what's
come before so and so that would be your
response to the the Bjorn Lomborg
argument that basically if you if you
spend all this energy trying to solve
the co2 problem it's gonna take away all
your other goals of trying to rid the
world of poverty and malaria and so
forth it's it's a it's a stupid waste of
the earth's resources to put money
towards that when there are better
things we can do
yeah well the actual spending on the R&D
piece you know say the US should spend
10 billion or more than it is right now
it's not that dramatic it shouldn't take
away from other things the thing you get
into big money on and this reasonable
people can disagree is when you have
something that's non-economic and you're
trying to fund that that to me mostly is
waste unless you're very close and
you're just funding the learning curve
and it's gonna get very cheap I believe
we should try more things that have a
potential to be far less expensive if
the trade-off you get into is let's make
energy super and super expensive then
the rich can afford that I mean all of
us here could pay five times as much for
our energy and not change our lifestyle
the disaster is for that two billion and
even Lomborg has changed his stick now
is why isn't the Rd getting more
discussed he's still because of his
earlier stuff sort of associated with
the skeptic camp but he's realized
that's that's a pretty lonely camp and
and so he's making the Rd point and and
so there is a threat of something that I
think is appropriate the R&D piece it's
crazy how little it's funded well bill I
suspect I speak above most people here
to say I really hope your wish comes
true thank you so much thank you
you
[Music]
my name is Sonia others and foundation
how does change happen you raise the
awareness and you inspire the change you
come to Ted
you do TEDx
the community
you'll find solutions
and opens an
that's what we do that's why we can't
[Music]
people are playing with words and it's
true
all week long people have been putting
words together in very unique ways I've
been thinking about how food and wine
are paired by experts who really
understand the flavors and here at Ted
people are putting words together in
pairs because they understand the
meaning reckless creativity what a
pairing that is I'm just thinking about
words that don't go together where 1 and
1 equal 3 I think that's what Ted's all
about isn't as just putting things
together we don't normally think